Add page about performance monitoring, Closes #107 (#112)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: user-guide/monitoring/monitoring.md

# Performance Monitoring

We use [New Relic](http://newrelic.com/) to monitor the activities inside of the application. It enables to have detailed insight
of the system and keep track of performance of each activity. E.g. an HTTP API call or a background job from queue.

> 

Reviewer: Please mention here what are the blew given points.

1. [Enable New Relic](#enable-new-relic)
   * [Register on Website](#register-on-website)
   * [Add license key as evironment variable](#add-license-key-as-environment-variable)
   * [Start Lisk Core node](#start-lisk-core-node)
2. [Keep your node busy](#keep-your-node-busy)
   * [Option 1: Lisk Core Test Suite](#option-1-lisk-core-test-suite)
   * [Option 2: Use Apache Benchmark Tool](#option-2-use-apache-benchmark-tool)
   * [Option 3: Use Siege Tool](#option-3-use-siege-tool)
   * [Option 4: Write custom script](#option-4-write-custom-script)
3. [Analyse results](#analyse-results)

## Enable New Relic

> ### Register on Website

Reviewer: Better to change it to "Get New Relic license key"

First thing you need to do is registering an account at https://rpm.newrelic.com, if you have not already done that.
After successful login, select "Account settings" in the account dropdown in the New Relic UI.
From the Account information section on the right side of the Summary page, copy your license key.

### Add license key as environment variable

To enable the performance monitoring on your node make sure you have an environment variable `NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY`
available and set:

```bash
export NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY={your-personal-license-key}
```

> ### Start Lisk Core node

Reviewer: Start or Restart if already running.

Then start the node normally, depending on the distribution:

```bash
bash lisk.sh start # binary
pm2 start lisk # source
docker start container_id # docker
```

## Keep your node busy

As second step, keep your node busy by running various API request against it.
There are several ways to create workload on your node:

### Option 1: Lisk Core Test Suite

Info | Note 
--- | --- 
![info note](../../info-icon.png "Info Note") | The Lisk Core Test Suite is only available for Lisk Core from Source.

Tests are run using the following command:

```bash
npm test -- mocha:<tag>:<suite>:[section]
```

* Where **tag** can be one of `default | unstable | slow | extensive` (required)
* Where **suite** can be one of `unit | integration | functional | network` (required)
* Where **section** depending of the chosen suite can be:
* when `functional` --> `get | post | ws` (optional)

Examples:

```bash
npm test -- mocha:slow:unit
npm test -- mocha:extensive:integration
npm test -- mocha:default:functional
npm test -- mocha:unstable:functional:get

> npm test -- mocha:untagged:network

Reviewer: Unit tests can't be used for newrelic monitoring. As they don't execute in the context of running app.

Author: I added a note with that info and removed unit test from examples.

```

`now`: Appends the current system time on top of the Apache Bench output. In case you want to compare New Relic benchmark results with Apache Bench output, it is convenient to add it for knowing when the benchmark started exactly, as Apache Bench is not logging that itself.

`-n`: The number of requests that are executed

`-c`: Number of requests to perform in parallel.

### Option 3: Use Siege Tool

The [Siege tool](https://www.joedog.org/siege-manual) is another tool for benchmarking the performance of HTTP servers.

Do e.g. the following request:

```bash
siege -c 10 -t 30m http://127.0.0.1:7000/api/blocks
```

`-c`: Number of requests to perform in parallel.

`-t`: Allows you to run the test for a selected period of time.

### Option 4: Write custom script

Feel free to write your own custom scripts and specify the order and amount of API requests yourself, depending on a special use case or a scenario you want to benchmark.

## Analyze results

Log in to New Relic again. The monitoring data will be visible to your New Relic account with the name of the network you started, e.g. `lisk-mainnet`, `lisk-testnet`.

> ![New Relic UI](new-relic-ui.png)

Reviewer: You may refer or copy the output we used previously in two other issues. API performance benchmarking bu Lucas, and BYTE comparison by Mehmat.

   3. [Start Lisk Core node](#restart-lisk-core-node)
2. [Keep your node busy](#keep-your-node-busy)
   * [Option 1: Lisk Core Test Suite](#option-1-lisk-core-test-suite)
   * [Option 2: Use Apache Benchmark Tool](#option-2-use-apache-benchmark-tool)
   * [Option 3: Use Siege Tool](#option-3-use-siege-tool)
   * [Option 4: Write custom script](#option-4-write-custom-script)
3. [Analyse results](#analyse-results)

## Enable New Relic

### Get New Relic license key

First thing you need to do is registering an account at https://rpm.newrelic.com, if you have not already done that.
After successful login, select "Account settings" in the account dropdown in the New Relic UI.
From the Account information section on the right side of the Summary page, copy your license key.

### Add license key as environment variable

To enable the performance monitoring on your node make sure you have an environment variable `NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY`
available and set:

```bash
export NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY={your-personal-license-key}
```

### (Re)start Lisk Core node

Then start the node normally, or restart if it is already running.

```bash

> bash lisk.sh start # start lisk core binary

Reviewer 2: This will not restart core, `./lisk.sh reload` will.

pm2 start lisk # start lisk core source

> docker start container_id # start lisk core docker

Reviewer 2: This will not restart a container, `docker restart <container>` will. To keep in line our docker example we should recommend adding `NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY` to `docker-compose.override.yml` and running `docker-compose up -d`.

   * [Option 1: Lisk Core Test Suite](#option-1-lisk-core-test-suite)
   * [Option 2: Use Apache Benchmark Tool](#option-2-use-apache-benchmark-tool)
   * [Option 3: Use Siege Tool](#option-3-use-siege-tool)
   * [Option 4: Write custom script](#option-4-write-custom-script)
3. [Analysis with New Relic](#analysis-with-new-relic)

## Enable New Relic

### Get New Relic license key

First thing you need to do is registering an account at https://rpm.newrelic.com, if you have not already done that.
After successful login, select "Account settings" in the account dropdown in the New Relic UI.
From the Account information section on the right side of the Summary page, copy your license key.

### Add license key

#### Option 1: As environment variable

To enable the performance monitoring on your node make sure you have an environment variable `NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY`
available and set:

##### Binary & Source

The following command works for Lisk Core Binary and from Source distributions:
```bash
export NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY={your-personal-license-key}
```

##### Docker

For Docker distributions of Lisk Core, do the following to add the evironment variable:

```bash
cd lisk_repo

> vim docker/docker-compose.override.yml

Reviewer 3: We should be agnostic on which tools to use.
`vim` is just an editor and any editor can be used.
I suggest just saying that the license key should be added to the `docker-compose.override.yml` file and then show how it will look like.

Reviewer: We may be following same pattern around documentation, so we should fix those everywhere. https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-docs/issues/117

```

Add your license key to `docker-compose.override.yml` like so:

```bash
version: "3"
services:

  lisk:
    environment:
      - NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY=XXXXXXXXX
```

> Then, save your changes and update docker, so that it can use the new environment variable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Then, save your changes and update Dockerfile, so that it can use the new environment variable.
```

```bash
<esc> # press esc to quit insert mode of vim

> :wq # save changes and quit vim afterwards

Reviewer 3: Same as before. This is not necessary as the user should use the editor he/she is more familiar with.

docker-compose up -d
```

#### Option 2: In newrelic.js

> The second way of adding the license key is by editing `newrelic.js` which can be found in the root directory of the Lisk Core installation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The second way of adding the license key is to edit `newrelic.js` file which can be found in the root directory of the Lisk Core installation.
```

```bash
cd lisk_repo # navigate inside the root folder of lisk core

> vim newrelic.js

Reviewer 3: Same here.

```

Inside the file search for the option `license_key` option and add your license key as string value.

> If you use "vim", press `i` to get into the insert mode.

Reviewer 3: Same here.

```bash
/**
 * Your New Relic license key.
 *
 * MUST set the license key using `NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY` env variable
 * if you want to enable the monitoring of the lisk node
 */
license_key: '{your-personal-license-key}',
```

After adding the license key, save changes and quit the editor:

```bash
<esc> # press esc to quit insert mode of vim

> :wq # save changes and quit vim afterwards

Reviewer 3: Same here.

```

### (Re)start Lisk Core node

Then start the node normally,

```bash
bash lisk.sh start # start lisk core binary
pm2 start lisk # start lisk core source
docker start container_id # start lisk core docker
```

... or restart if it is already running.

```bash
bash lisk.sh reload # restart lisk core binary
pm2 restart lisk # restart lisk core source
docker restart container_id # restart lisk core docker
```

## Keep your node busy

> As second step, keep your node busy by running various API request against it.

Reviewer 4: An explanation of why it's important to keep your node busy is missing here. Please add it.

Also, only one way of keeping a node busy is given in example here - by running various API requests. Please make it clear that NewRelic can be also use to monitor more actions (snapshotting, syncing etc)

`-n`: The number of requests that are executed

`-c`: Number of requests to perform in parallel.

`-k`: Enable the HTTP KeepAlive feature, i.e., perform multiple requests within one HTTP session.

### Option 3: Use Siege Tool

The [Siege tool](https://www.joedog.org/siege-manual) is another tool for benchmarking the performance of HTTP servers.

Do e.g. the following request:

```bash
siege -c 10 -t 30m http://127.0.0.1:7000/api/blocks
```

`-c`: Number of requests to perform in parallel.

`-t`: Allows you to run the test for a selected period of time.

### Option 4: Write custom script

Feel free to write your own custom scripts and specify the order and amount of API requests yourself, depending on a special use case or a scenario you want to benchmark.

## Analysis with New Relic 

Let's take a case study, we want to analyze the performance of API `GET /api/transactions` endpoint, to figure out: 

1. If there is any bottle neck in the database level 
2. Which of the database query is taking most of the time

Here are the steps we follow: 

```
$ cd ~/lisk_repo 
~/lisk_repo $ export NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY=xxxxxxxxxxx
~/lisk_repo $ npm start  
```

> Now start making some requests with siege. 

Reviewer 4: usin
```suggestion
Now start making some requests using Siege:
```

```
siege -c 10 -t 5m http://127.0.0.1:4000/api/transactions
```

> The script will automatically be finished in 5 minutes and then we proceed to results. But during that time please keep in mind: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The script will automatically send 10 parallel requests 
```
```suggestion
The script will automatically be keep on sending requests against your node for 5 minutes (`-t 5m`). During that time please keep in mind: 
```

> The script will automatically be finished in 5 minutes and then we proceed to results. But during that time please keep in mind: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The script will automatically keep on sending the HTTP requests against your node for 5 minutes (`-t 5m`). During that time please keep in mind: 
```

> 1. You may disable the cache on the node to get real performance analysis. 

Author: Might be helpful to add a short description here how to disable cache.

```suggestion
1. You may disable the cache on the node to get real performance analysis. To do this, set `cacheEnabled` in configuration to `false`.
```

> 2. You should use some real data e.g. testnet to run your tests to have viable results.

Reviewer 4: We're sending the requests against of the port 4000 though, which suggest it's a devnet.

3. It take couple of minutes to show analyzed results in newrelic interface so be patience. 
  

> Now our results will be compiled lets look towards it. First login to https://rpm.newrelic.com, and select `APM` from top menu. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To see the NewRelic instrumentation results, please log in to https://rpm.newrelic.com, and select `APM` from the top menu. 
```

The first screen you see will be list of applications. Depending on which network you run your node in, you will see the applications. As shown in the image below.  
  
![Apps List UI](./assets/app_dashboard.png) 

> Please select the specific application by clicking its name. And you will see following dashboard.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please select the specific application by clicking its name. You will see following dashboard.  
```

![Dashboard UI](./assets/dashboard.png) 

> To know fine grained details of this dashboard, would be recommended to read https://learn.newrelic.com/courses/intro_apm. But for now since we are interested only in the our use case of `GET /api/transactions` we will move to transactions page. Please select the transactions from the left menu in above screen. See detail instructions in the below image. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To know fine-grained details of this dashboard, please read https://learn.newrelic.com/courses/intro_apm. For now, since we only executed the HTTP requests against our node (`GET /api/transactions`) there is only one section having interesting results. Please select "Transactions" from the left menu in above screen. See detailed instructions in the below image. 
```

> To know fine grained details of this dashboard, please read https://learn.newrelic.com/courses/intro_apm. For now since we are interested only in our use case of `GET /api/transactions` we will move to transactions page. Please select "Transactions" from the left menu in above screen. See detailed instructions in the below image. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe its worth it to mention that the transactions page has nothing to do with Lisk transactions itself. It's just how New Relic group the requests to be analysed.

![Transactions UI](./assets/transactions.png)

In the above image the most valuable information we had is highlighted in the rectangle, with key information: 

1. Most of the time (56%) was spent in ExpressJS which is a nodejs module. 

> 2. It involved one database view and one table during the transactions. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. During the experiment, one database view (`trs_list`) and one database table (`trs`) were involved on the persistence layer.
```

> 3. Querying to database table `delegates` was quick 

Reviewer 4: .. it took X% of time.

> 3. Querying to database table `delegates` was quick 

Reviewer 4: ", whereas the query to database view `trs_list` was 3 times more expensive - X& of time.

> 4. While query to database view `trs_list` was a bit expensive.

Reviewer 4: Then, after https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-docs/pull/112/files#r234259649, this line can be removed.

5. On average API calls for `GET /api/transactions` took 122ms.

If you want this information in a tabular form to present somewhere, please click on "Show all transactions table" link. Then you will see a view like this. 

![Transactions Data](./assets/transactions_data.png)

From this screen you can see: 

1. In selected time range we made 14252 total requests to `GET /api/transactions`.

> 2. The worst request took 2.17 seconds time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The slowest request took 2.17 seconds time.
```

3. The fastest request took 10ms
4. Average time for requests is 122ms while standard deviation is 213ms. 
5. Difference between average and standard deviation shows there were small spikes between requests.
6. You can export data to CSV format from this screen to keep record or share with others. 

Now if we want to debug deeper which transactions actually took 2.17 seconds, please go back to old screen, scroll down a bit and you wills see transaction traces. 

![Trace list](./assets/trace_list.png)

> Here you can see individual transaction which took longer time and considered slow. The threshold which defines the slow transactions are configured in file `newrelic.js` under `transaction_tracer.explain_threshold`. Which is currently 100ms, so every request took more than 100ms will be considered slow and will be logged as trace in newrelic. Let's debug further and see what makes this request slow, by clicking on any of the trace link in the list. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here you can see an overview of an individual transaction which took longer time and is considered as "slow". The threshold which defines the "slow" transactions is configured in file `newrelic.js` under `transaction_tracer.explain_threshold`, which is currently 100ms- every request which took more than 100ms will be considered as "slow" and logged as the trace by NewRelic. Let's debug further and verify what made this request "slow", by clicking on any of the trace links in the list. 
```

> Here you can see individual transaction which took longer time and considered slow. The threshold which defines the slow transactions is configured in file `newrelic.js` under `transaction_tracer.explain_threshold`. Which is currently 100ms, so every request took more than 100ms will be considered slow and will be logged as trace in New Relic. Let's debug further and see what makes this request slow, by clicking on any of the trace links in the list. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here you can see individual transaction which took longer time and considered slow. The threshold which defines the slow transactions is configured in file `newrelic.js` under `transaction_tracer.explain_threshold`. Which is currently 100ms, so every request which takes more than 100ms will be considered slow and will be logged as trace in New Relic. Let's debug further and see what makes this request slow, by clicking on any of the trace links in the list. 
```

![Trace summary](./assets/trace_summary.png)

> So you can see here most of time was spent in two functions `modules.transactions.shared.getTransactions` and `Middleware: bound logClientConnections`. You can go to trace detail to see more information and call stack. You can also click on "Database queries" to see which queries were executed during this request.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As shown on the above trace summary, the most of the transaction's time was spent in two functions `modules.transactions.shared.getTransactions` and `Middleware: bound logClientConnections`. You can go to trace detail to see more information and call stack. You can also click on "Database queries" to see which queries were executed during this request.
```

> Now coming back to original information we want to achieve, we need find the database query which is taking most of the time. For it click on the left side menu for "Database". There sort by "Most time consuming" and then select top of the list.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It's also possible to find the database query which is taking most of the time. To do it, please click on the left side menu for "Database" and then sort by "Most time consuming" and then select the top of the list.  
```

![Database Queries](./assets/database_query.png)

> Scroll down on this page. 

Reviewer 4: What's that?

![Slow Queries](./assets/slow_queries.png)

> So here we can find information as seen: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By analyzing the above diagrams, we can conclude the following:
```

> 1. The slowest queries in the system are queries for `trs_list` view.

Reviewer 4: Overall during the system or only during the experiment?

> 2. For that view the slowest query is the `SELECT count(*) FROM trs_list` which took 2.13 seconds.

Reviewer 4: It's not clear what is "that view", please consolidate this information with point 1.

3. There are few other queries in the on `trs_list` view which took more than 1 second time. 
4. If you click on the top slow query, you will notice the query was executed during `GET /api/transactions`

![Query Detail](./assets/query_detail.png)

Hope above use case helps you to understand the usage and benefits of NewRelic. Please let us know if you want to know more. 

## FAQs

**I am not seeing Lisk Data in the New Relic APM dashboard?**

Please make sure to check following. 

1. Are you using a valid license key to your account
2. Had you exported the license key on the node where you are running Lisk 
3. Had you selected proper time range in New Relic APM 

> 4. Are you looking on right page e.g. You may be searching web transactions but you had selected Non-Web transactions in UI. 

Author: ```suggestion
4. Are you looking on right page? E.g. you may be searching web transactions but you had selected Non-Web transactions in UI.
```

5. If you just run the node, give it few minutes let New Relic to crunch the data and show in UI. 

**Are the performance measures consistent?**

> 1. As far as you are using same machine specification to run different scenarios, the stats will consistent.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. As far as you are using same machine specification to run different scenarios, the stats will be consistent.
```

2. You might not see the viable results if your development Blockchain dataset is empty. This could be changed by running your tests against the Testnet data.
3. It may take a couple of minutes to show the analyzed results in the New Relic interface so be patient. 
  
To see the NewRelic instrumentation results, please log in to https://rpm.newrelic.com, and select `APM` from the top menu. 

The first screen is the list of applications. Depending on which network you run your node in, you will see the application title as shown in the image below. 
  
![Apps List UI](./assets/app_dashboard.png) 

Please select the specific application by clicking its name. You will see the following dashboard:  

![Dashboard UI](./assets/dashboard.png) 

To know fine-grained details of this dashboard, please read https://learn.newrelic.com/courses/intro_apm. For now, since during the experiment we only executed the HTTP requests against our node (`GET /api/transactions`) there is only one section having interesting results. Please select "Transactions" from the left menu in above screen. See detailed instructions in the below image. 

Info | Note 
--- | --- 

> ![info note](../../info-icon.png "Info Note") | To clarify New Relic transactions have no relation with Lisk Transactions. Its just the grouping term, newrelic use to show analytics. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![info note](../../info-icon.png "Info Note") | To clarify, New Relic transactions have no relation with Lisk Transactions. It's just the grouping term New Relic use to show analytics. 
```

# Performance Monitoring

> We use [New Relic](http://newrelic.com/) to monitor the activities inside of the application. It enables to have detailed insight into the system and keep track of the performance of any activity, e.g. an HTTP API call or a background process from Lisk Core jobs queue.

Reviewer 2: > It enables to have detailed
That does not sound right.

   1. [Get New Relic license key](#get-new-relic-license-key)
   2. [Add license key](#add-license-key)
      * [Option 1: As environment variable](#option-1-as-environment-variable)
      * [Option 2: In newrelic.js](#option-2-in-newrelicjs)
   3. [(Re)start Lisk Core node](#restart-lisk-core-node)
2. [Keep your node busy](#keep-your-node-busy)
   * [Option 1: Lisk Core Test Suite](#option-1-lisk-core-test-suite)
   * [Option 2: Apache Bench](#option-2-apache-bench)
   * [Option 3: Siege](#option-3-siege)
   * [Option 4: Custom script](#option-4-custom-script)
3. [Analysis with New Relic](#analysis-with-new-relic)
4. [FAQ](#faq)

## Enable New Relic

### Get New Relic license key

First thing you need to do is registering an account at https://rpm.newrelic.com, if you have not already done that.
After successful login, select "Account settings" in the account dropdown in the New Relic UI.
From the Account information section on the right side of the Summary page, copy your license key.

### Add license key

#### Option 1: As environment variable

To enable the performance monitoring on your node make sure you have an environment variable `NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY`

> available and set:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
set:
```

##### Binary & Source

The following command works for Lisk Core Binary and from Source distributions:
```bash
export NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY=your-personal-license-key
```

##### Docker

For Docker distributions of Lisk Core, do the following to add the environment variable:

```bash
cd lisk_repo
vim docker/docker-compose.override.yml
```

Add your license key to `docker-compose.override.yml` like so:

```bash
version: "3"
services:

  lisk:
    environment:

>       - NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY=XXXXXXXXX

Reviewer 2: Above we used `export NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY=your-personal-license-key` and here `NEW_RELIC_LICENSE_KEY=XXXXXXXXX`; shouldn't we stay consistent?

Author: I will change it to XXXX then, as we already use that in migration and configuration pages

```

Then, save your changes and update Dockerfile, so that it can use the new environment variable.

```bash
<esc> # press esc to quit insert mode of vim
:wq # save changes and quit vim afterwards
docker-compose up -d
```

#### Option 2: In newrelic.js

The second way of adding the license key is to edit `newrelic.js` file which can be found in the root directory of the Lisk Core installation.

```bash
cd lisk_repo # navigate inside the root folder of lisk core
vim newrelic.js
```

Inside the file search for the option `license_key` and add your license key as string value.
If you use "vim", press `i` to get into the insert mode.

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: This isn't a bash script.
